Isn't that cool?
Isn't that great?
That's too cool.
Yes.
That's cool.
So, bricolage, as an activity or a department... B-R-I-C-O-L-H... Oh, goodness.
It's an activity or department store, a do-it-yourself or a bricolage.
It can be a handyman or a do-it-yourself enthusiast.
But in a wider sense, it does mean to cobble together, tinker with objects or indeed concepts, construct something with odds and ends.
That's exactly what I do.
It's what I've always done.
Always?
Even when you started?
Even when I started.
So you weren't actually drawing pictures out of my mind?
No.
You weren't conjuring them out of the air?
You needed things.
I need things to refer to.
Devices, objects, pictures.
Crutches.
I need my crutches.
You see, I don't consider myself, I don't consider anything I've ever done being original.
I'm not concerned about being original.
I'm not concerned about being an artist.
I'm not concerned about any of these things.
It's just not anything that I'm really genuinely concerned about.
If I'm an artist, that's for you to say, not for me to say.
If what I do is original, that's for somebody else to determine, not for me to determine.
All I'm trying to do is make interesting images, and I'll make those interesting any way I can.
And to get there, here.
So tell me some of the things that you've used over the years.
I mean, obviously, this computer was invented with you in mind.
Well, this thing right here has been a sharp SF7800 copy machine that has...
SF-7800.
Which has a zoom that can go up to 200%.
Yeah.
Okay.
That's as much as it'll do.
That computer will do 800% in a single whack.
But if I want to go to 1600%, I just have to go it again, and I can keep that thing going forever.
So these are machines, but the sources of information, so magazines... Sources are anything that I find.
Those are the little bits and pieces that I cobble together.
RISD has a department which is called the clipping file, the picture collection.
And it is an entire floor of the library that has what I have in those five cabinets.
And this is stuff that you've used.
Oh, I go down there all the time.
So you go down there, these are sources that you go down and use.
I want a Near Eastern costume, so I go down and look in their files under costume, costume Middle Eastern, and then I just go through it, and I find characters in costume doing this and doing that.
And you've always done this?
I've always done it.
Children's books?
Children's books, everything.
Can you give me a couple of, of the 230 books, can you give me a couple of interesting examples of things that have inspired you, that have made their way into it?
Just a couple of examples that come to mind.
You mean of famous photographs, maybe?
Well, no, just things that have... So it can be a picture, it's a photograph, and you take that and you appropriate it and... No, it's every one of them.
I mean, there's not a book that I've done that I haven't done that with.
Sometimes it's... Well... Hey, hey, hey, get down from there!
What's that?
Who's Who in the Bible.
exactly because you're taking photographs you're taking photographs of people sure and so these aren't sure and a lot of times I won't be able to find a piece that will do what I want it to do maybe I'll have a head and shoulders of a figure but I won't have the hands doing what I want well then I just draw it you know I can draw so if it comes to that I will do that and if it means to turn you know changing the gesture of a head or
or putting a sword in somebody's hand or something like that.
That's just freehand drawing.
But that's what all these books are for.
All of these books here in the studio, most of them anyway, have to do with costume, resources, foot gear, helmets, arms, armor, all that kind of stuff.
And the books over there are all books of photographs.
You know, this is new.
Has this been written with regard to you?
I don't think they've gotten into this, have they?
Not much.
Well, that's good.
It's an interesting thing to me, though, because a lot of people do this and don't claim it because they're afraid to be accused of being unoriginal, of being derivative.
Well, piss on it.
I don't care.
It doesn't matter to me.
But, like, this is one of my favorite sources, the photographs of people like Doris Ullman.
and Walker Evans.
One of my all-time favorites.
I think I've got all of his books, yeah.
I think I have half of these books that are right here.
Ms.
Welty's photographs.
She was wonderful.
WPA pictures, right?
Beautiful photographs.
In fact, I asked her one time, HBJ asked me to do paintings for a new issue of her fiction in paperback.
Which I, of course, did.
And I ran into her and she had seen them.
And I said, I guess I based every one of them on various elements of her photographs.
Oh, she must have loved that.
Every one of them.
I mean, I take a figure from here and a head from here and put this head on this figure and put this, you know.
Did she notice this?
Yeah.
And I said, I hope you don't mind I did that.
And she said, she clapped her hands together.
She said, oh, Barry, I love what you've done with it.
And she said, you have made my photographs your own images, you know.
And it's what I do.
It's not that I'm paying any disrespect or trying to steal anything from anybody in that sense.
I'm just using, because I'm not, like, for instance, I would never pull off.
I would never do this image.
But I might do that fork.
Mm-hmm.
I might pull a fork out of there, or I might pull this bit of this newspaper out of there, you know.
Just with these couple tines going up.
A couple of tines, yes, just to pick up this light.
I might use an egg or a cap hanging, you know, something that I would never, never go in and do this composition.
I would never copy that.
Is this particularly, do you think this is something that you noticed
This book illustration?
Would illustrators be doing this everywhere?
It's done everywhere.
If we go back in the kitchen, I'll show you the Jasper Johns song, hanging above the sink.
Now Jasper Johns, the lithograph there is called The Ventriloquist, I think it is, and he's quoting my great whale from Moby Dick.
Okay?
If you look at Robert Rauschenberg's work, Rauschenberg does it in a much more direct way than I do.
He actually takes the image
He would take this, for instance, cut this out, and take this very printed image against the canvas, wash it through with typewash, which dissolves the ink right off onto the canvas.
You can admittedly do this.
Oh, of course.
Yeah.
It's recorded.
I mean, this is common.
Common done.
Commonly done.
That's fascinating.
And then a couple of quotes on... And you go into music.
And appropriation in music is even...
greater.
I mean, I've been concentrating the last couple of months on listening to Handel oratorios.
If you start listening to all of the oratorios, you know, Joseph and his brethren and Balthasar's feast and all that kind of stuff, and everybody knows Messiah, you can start hearing where Handel has lifted this piece and lifted this piece and lifted this piece, you know, and put it all together.
And he wasn't about stealing from other... Listen, one of my best
One of the best feature stories I ever wrote when I was a reporter was I went flying with the Blue Angels.
Oh, you did?
Yeah.
I mean, in the airplane?
In the airplane.
And, you know, and they took me in.
And I remember... How many times did you puke?
No, I love this stuff.
I have a pilot's license, which I haven't used in a long time.
Do you?
Guess what I'm interested in.
There you go.
I mean, I love to fly, and I love airplanes.
But I remember I came back, and my lead for that story was, and it was a straight ripoff of Edward R. Moore, and yesterday the 3rd Air Force took me for a little ride.
I said, yesterday the Blue Angels took me for a little while.
Yeah, of course.
We all knew that.
Absolutely.
It was one of the greats.
But I know, whether it worked for him or why can't it work for me?
Yeah, right.
You know?
What was it T.S.
Eliot said, young writers plagiarize, old writers steal?
That's right.
What Charlotte said, history repeats itself, historians repeat one another.
Right.
Which is why when a mistake gets in the history books, it's there forever.
It's almost the hardest thing in the world to correct an historical error.
Because the historians keep lifting it and using it.
Because they keep lifting it from each other.
Yeah.
And saying it back as if it's true.
I have to pee.
Okay.
It's been a lot.
And, you know, we can always... Oh, email's great.
Email.
We're close.
Just briefly, I know I've got some quotes on it, but... I can't get back to this flying thing, though, here in a second.
Okay.
We've talked about illustrating new books and, you know, of course, that's a 19th century that's gone, people illustrating, especially new works of fiction.
You have tried taking a hand of that.
Maybe give me a quote on your thoughts on that.
Well, that is part of my concern.
Working with my contemporaries is the great joy of all.
to be able to work with people who are, you know, using 20th century sensibilities the same way I am.
Unfortunately, the economic structure of publishing doesn't allow for it very often, especially not mainstream publishing.
Well, because, you know, I mean, unless you're Joyce Carol Oates... Which, and you've worked with her, actually.
Yeah, a number of times.
And, in fact, I illustrated a novel of hers just last year, or two years ago.
time starts.
I can't keep up with it.
But, yeah, I did First Love, a little novel she published with Echo Press.
Now, Joyce was perfectly willing to share royalties with me.
Well, if you're prolific as she is, you can afford to do that.
But if you're somebody who writes one novel every five years... And it's understandable, isn't it?
Yeah.
And they're going to share their royalty with me.
Especially when the novel's probably going to be just as well with or without the pictures.
Exactly.
Exactly so.
And the...
the publisher is not going to increase the royalty schedule to 15% to give me a 5% royalty.
That's not going to happen.
So economics doesn't really work out, except in the private press world.
And that's where I've had the privilege of working with people like Robert Olin Butler and Kay Gibbons and John Updike.
That's nice.
Yeah, it's very nice.
And the perfect union is what?
The illustrator brings...
an added dimension to it, to make it a synergistic kind of a production?
The ideal place is to do an image for a book that even the author recognizes is taking it where the author didn't take it.
That's the great—that's the moment of triumph right there.
Does anything spring to mind?
Yeah, back from Joyce Carol Oates' First Love.
She said, I did an image, it's a very strange little novel, and I did an image of a serpent crawling across the face of Christ.
But the face of Christ is, I think, a Greek icon.
You know, so you had this very carefully modeled, naturalistic looking snake crawling across this very flat icon.
She wrote me a letter about that.
She said, she remarked that it was very...
arresting or strange or some language like that.
And then she said, and of course, Barry, that's your image, not mine.
So those are really, those are uplifting moments.
But you don't get that with Mark Twain, you know.
And Miss Welty's saying to me that I had made the Robert Bridegroom my book, you know.
That sort of thing.
That's kind of nice.
Sweet things, you know.
But that's really... That's the job of illustration.
The job of illustration, if it's done well, is not to merely ape and mimic and repeat the text.
It's to take the text another step to at least confront and provoke a reader into thinking that something else might be possible.
Think about this, for instance, this way.
And you really have to read that book and understand it and almost get into the creative...
mode of the author, is that right?
Do you talk about it with the author, or do you try not to?
Yeah, but of course the ones that are alive and are willing to talk.
Well, I mean the living ones, yeah, obviously.
Yeah, we do, sometimes.
And the dead ones can't bitch, either, if they don't like it.
Well, that's one of the reasons why in children's books there really isn't much intercourse between writer and illustrator, is because the writer often will want to tell me too much.
I have a story about that.
It has to do with Ken Kesey.
I did a book with him, a children's book called Little Trick is a Squirrel Meets Big Double the Bear.
That's Big Double the Bear over there on the wall.
And my editor at Viking said to me one day, he said, Ken wants to know if he can call you.
And I said, sure.
I'd love to talk to Ken Kesey.
Who wouldn't?
Because he wanted to tell you how to do the pictures.
So I hung up and I'm sitting there thinking, Ken Kesey won't call me.
And I called my editor back and I said, hey, why does Keesey want to call me?
She said, I don't know.
I said, okay, well, tell him you're calling me.
But listen, tell him this too.
If he's going to call me to tell me how to do my work, don't call.
Or if he's going to call me and tell me how to do my work, he can call me and tell me how to do my work.
But he's going to have to, next year, take 12 drawings from me and write a story about my 12 drawings, except I'm going to tell him how to write the story.
And he never called me.
That's perfect sense.
But that's when it's an equal collaboration.
Right.
Exactly.
There are times when people are writing for the artist, or the artist is illustrating for the author.
Right.
And so it's not an even relationship.
And so then maybe there can be a disparity.
Exactly.
And the best kinds of collaborations are the ones that begin when neither person's done any work.
Yeah.
And this is funny.
So you're working the end product at the same time?
You see, what you tell me now makes perfect sense.
I remember talking to Anita Silvey at Hovement for asking about the process.
When you're considering children's books, do you expect the author to come in with the art?
And she says, no, in fact, we prefer that you don't even know the artist.
Yeah.
We like to marry the two together.
That's right.
And I think that's what you're telling me.
That's the reason.
People write me all the time and send me manuscripts and stuff, you know, and I always say, hey, listen, this isn't the way we do this.
No, that's right.
It makes perfect sense, doesn't it?
The bailiwick of the editor is marrying these two.
And that's where the editor comes in and says, this person will be perfect for this manuscript.
That's right.
And we don't even want them to talk.
As little as possible, if you happen to be a good friend.
When I did Beauty and the Beast with Nancy Willard, Nancy had not written the story, and I hadn't done any illustrations.
And we were both commissioned at the same time by Harcourt to do this book.
We went, we drove, I drove over to... She lives out here, yeah.
Yeah, she lived in, and she lives in Poughkeepsie, teaches at Vassar.
And so I went over and met her and her husband.
Were you with me, or was it Rami?
I don't know, I've done a couple times.
Well, we went to this place outside of Rheinbeck, and it was this really ramshackle, old, wonderful Victorian mansion.
It was run by Miss Sukley, Miss Daisy Sukley, who, when she died, under her bed they found
a box full of love letters to her from Franklin Delano Roosevelt.
Oh, sure.
You remember this?
Yes, I do.
Okay, Miss Daisy Suitley.
And she took me and Nancy Willard all around this house, because that's where she lived.
She raised Scotty's, which was one of which belonged to the land.
And as we walked around, I was taking photographs of things in this house, and Nancy and I were telling the story back and forth of Beauty and the Beast, back and forth to each other.
Oh, she said, you know,
This would be a perfect place where beauty plays chess with the beast.
And she's making up her own story, but setting it because of the sun.
We walked up onto the roof.
That's a crazy story.
And we're telling the story back then.
I then got home and developed all my photographs, sent her a set of them, and then she wrote the story.
So in this case, the images sort of precipitated the prose.
That's great.
I love that.
And that's a perfect kind of collaboration.
I love that picture.
Willie Morris and I did the same sort of thing in this little book on Little League.
I had done my sketches and everything for the book, but it didn't quite work out to 32 pages.
I needed two more spreads in order for the prose to break the way I wanted it to break.
So I called Willie and I said, hey, Willie, we've got to have two more scenes here.
And he said, we got any ideas?
And I said, yeah.
I said, how about you?
He said, well, yeah, I think I'll do something with the grandparents.
Okay, I'll do one about, you know, bless the grandparents and all these kinds of stuff.
And he said, how about you?
And I said, well, Willie, I tried to play ball when I was a kid, but I could never hit the ball.
I had a zero batting average.
He laughed his ass off.
And he told that story one more time.
And so I said, what I'd like to do is see a thing in there for a little kid who always strikes out.
So he added that for me, you know?
So those are the kinds of collaborations that are really nice.
But when one person comes in to the other and starts demanding certain things or double-guessing, you know, that can get ugly.
That's not going to work.
That's a great picture.
Isn't it?
I'll have Kara print one for you.
Does she do her own darkroom?
Really?
Hey, Kara!
That's okay.
I love the dog.
You, uh, you can ask me a question about where you're going to bring up.
I'm a 747, out a window.
No, what is?
I'm sorry, what's the background?
The background.
Okay.
Yeah, it's a stick with camera.
And the name of this?
The destroyer.
And then you put her on top of a globe that you must have got.
Yeah, sort of the orb, which comes from Albert Durer.
Which is exactly the same board that wisdom is sitting on.
That looks just like a stainless steel salad bowl.
Exactly what it is.
But you see, that gives me the top of the globe and it gives me the reflections.
Rather than making them up.
And then for Biblio, they would love a couple of self-portraits of yourself.
From the Bible or other sources.
I think I would like other sources because I also plan to talk about your...
Okay, come on now.
Come on, I'm looking at this to me.